This README file contains information on building the meta-kontron-come-xelx
BSP layer, and booting the images contained in the build directory. Please see
the corresponding sections below for details.

The BSP is made for Kontron COMe Modules - particularly this version has been
optimized and tested on systems with the Intel Atom® x6000E, Pentium® and
Celeron® Seriesprocessor like the COMe-mEL10 and COMe-cEL6.

We try to include some kind of compatibility with other COMe products where
possible. Therefore also patches and kernel drivers might be included that are
not absolutely necessary for for the product it is released for. This should
allow a smoth migration path between different module products.

Further information about available Kontron COMe products can be found here:

  https://www.kontron.com/products/boards-and-standard-form-factors/com-express/

Information on all Kontron products can be found here:

  http://www.kontron.com/products/


Compliance
==========

No steps have been taken to make this BSP compliant with the Yocto Project
requirements, which are listed here:

  https://www.yoctoproject.org/webform/yocto-project-compatible-registration


Dependencies
============

This layer depends on:

  URI: git://git.openembedded.org/bitbake
  branch: dunfell

  URI: git://git.yoctoproject.org/poky.git
  branch: dunfell

  URI: git://git.openembedded.org/openembedded-core
  layers: meta
  branch: dunfell

  URI: git://git.yoctoproject.org/meta-intel
  layers: intel
  branch: dunfell


Table of Contents
=================

   I. Layer description
  II. Building the meta-kontron-come-xelx BSP layer
 III. Booting the BSP live images
  IV. Installation to persistent storage

I. Layer description
====================

This layer is based:

 - on the Intel common BSP layer

 - on the OpenEmbedded Layer

 - on the latest meta-kontron BSP layer, which is provided along with this
   layer.

a. Additional kernel drivers and userspace fixes:

 - Add a KEM PLD driver for CPLD functionality support;
 - Add a Kontron EEPROM driver;
 - Add a Kontron bootcounter driver;
 - Enable in kernel following drivers and features:
    * NCT7802 HWMon sensor;
    * ACPI (i2c-scmi) SMBus drivers;
    * Hibernation to disk(S4) feature;
    * TPM2.0 driver;
    * 'powersave' and 'userspace' cpufreq governors;
 - Disable iTCO watchdog and i801 SMBus drivers.

b. KEAPIv3 support:

The KEAPI library provides unified interface to hardware drivers and
OS-independent API to get platform information. KEAPI is distributed as source
code with the code available from github:

  https://github.com/kontron/keapi

c. Multilib support:

By default only 64-bit set of system C library is included into the final
bootable BSP image. The support of x86 architecture(32-bit libraries) can be
enabled to by adding or uncommenting out the following lines in
meta-kontron-come-xelx/conf/machine/kontron-come-xelx.conf :

 require conf/multilib.conf
 MULTILIBS = "multilib:lib32"
 DEFAULTTUNE_virtclass-multilib-lib32 = "x86"

Additional 32-bit libraries and utilities can be integrated into bootable BSP
images by adding them to local.conf, e.g.:

  IMAGE_INSTALL_append = " lib32-libstdc++"

For additional information about multilib support, please refer to:

  https://www.yoctoproject.org/docs/3.1/dev-manual/dev-manual.html#combining-multiple-versions-library-files-into-one-image

II. Building the meta-kontron-come-xelx BSP layer
=================================================

a. Download Yocto release 3.1:

  wget http://git.yoctoproject.org/cgit/cgit.cgi/poky/snapshot/poky-yocto-3.1.9.tar.bz2

b. Download Intel® Common Core BSP

  wget http://git.yoctoproject.org/cgit/cgit.cgi/meta-intel/snapshot/meta-intel-dunfell.tar.bz2

c. Unpack Yocto poky tarball:

  tar xf poky-yocto-3.1.9.tar.bz2

d. Go to poky directory and unpack other layers tarballs. Use following
   commands for example:

  cd poky-yocto-3.1.9
  tar xf ../meta-intel-dunfell.tar.bz2
  tar xf ../yocto-bsp-*/meta-kontron-come-xelx_dunfell-23.0.9.tar.bz2
  tar xf ../yocto-bsp-*/meta-kontron_dunfell-23.0.9.tar.bz2

e. Get collection of OpenEmbedded and security layers:

  git clone git://git.openembedded.org/meta-openembedded -b dunfell
  git clone https://git.yoctoproject.org/git/meta-security -b dunfell

f. Rename the folder with unpacked "Intel® Common Core BSP" to "meta-intel":

  mv meta-intel-dunfell meta-intel

g. Run oe-init-build-env script:

  source oe-init-build-env

  If available, instead also the sample configuration can be used. In this case
  the steps h to k can be skipped for a default image configuration.

  TEMPLATECONF=meta-kontron-come-xelx/conf/ source oe-init-build-env

h. Then change MACHINE to "kontron-come-xelx" in conf/local.conf:

  MACHINE = "kontron-come-xelx"

i. Add paths to meta-intel and meta-kontron-come-xelx layers to
conf/bblayers.conf. Corresponding section of the file should look like this:

  BBLAYERS ?= " \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-poky \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-yocto-bsp \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-filesystems \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-gnome \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-multimedia \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-networking \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-oe \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-perl \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-python \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-security \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-openembedded/meta-xfce \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-intel \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-kontron \
    /full/path/to/poky/meta-kontron-come-xelx \
    "

j. To integrate a hardware video acceleration via gstreamer into the bootable
images, add a "commercial" license to LICENSE_FLAGS_WHITELIST in
conf/local.conf:

  LICENSE_FLAGS_WHITELIST = " commercial"

The reason this is needed is to prevent the image from including anything that
might violate the license terms of the packages used to implement the video
acceleration feature, such as gst-ffmpeg and ffmpeg. As always, please consult
the licenses included in the specific packages for details.

k. Run image build (it's possible to build kontron-test-image,
   kontron-test-image-data, core-image-sato or some other image):

  bitbake kontron-test-image

For the kontron-test-image with a full partition table and a small data
partition this can be used:

  bitbake kontron-test-image-data

NOTE: With this recipe a WIC image will be created, that can be handled in the
same way as the hddimg that is created with the kontron-test-image recipe.

###############################################################################
# WARNING: The kontron-test-image is for product evaluation and testing!      #
#          It does not incorporate any security features and is accessible    #
#          through the network, graphical interface and serial console as     #
#          root without password.                                             #
#          Never use this image in an untrusted environment!                  #
###############################################################################


III. Installing and booting the BSP live images
===============================================

The image created using the previous steps can be found in the following
directory:

  build/tmp/deploy/images

A pre-built version of the image for particular BSP should be also available
separately on the Kontron customer section:

  https://emdcustomersection.kontron.com

The image can be deployed to a mass storage device like a SATA disk, a USB
stick or a SD card.

For example a hard drive image can be written to a target device using the dd
utility (in Linux) or Image Writer (in Windows):

  # dd if=kontron-test-image-*.(hddimg|wic) of=TARGET_DEVICE bs=4M
  # sync
  # eject TARGET_DEVICE

Note: Compressed images need to be unextracted before being written to a
      device. For .xz file extensions this can be done with the xz/unxz tool.
Note: Instead of .hddimg also .wic is used as file extension, for images that
      contain partitioning. Both can be written directly to the disk as
      described.
      Nevertheless, the WIC image will complain about partition table errors
      when mounted. The reason is that the size of the target storage device
      is not known at build time. The problem can be fixed with the parted
      tool or sgdisk -e TARGET_DEVICE after installing the image. The
      kontron-test-image(-data) will do this automatically at first startup.

TARGET_DEVICE is the device node for the device that should contain the image
(e.g. /dev/sdd for SATA disk and USB stick or /dev/mmcblk0 for an SD card).
Please double check you are using the correct device as all data on that device
will be erased.

WIC images may also be written using bmaptool if available. This tool will also
extract compressed images on the fly while writing:

  # bmaptool copy kontron-test-image-*.(wic|wic.xz) TARGET_DEVICE

After writing the image, boot the board from this mass storage device . The
system should be booted to an Xfce graphical desktop.

To get access to the system via ssh protocol, use the root terminal to find out
or configure an IP address with the ifconfig command. After that, it will be
possible to log into the system via ssh as 'root' with empty password.

In case if a hdd image is corrupted after copying it to mass storage device,
try to clean the whole device by executing on host:

  dd if=/dev/zero of=TARGET_DEVICE bs=1M
  NOTE: all information on TARGET_DEVICE will be erased!


IV. Installation to persistent storage
======================================

In order to install Yocto Linux BSP to persistent storage, proceed with the
following steps:

a. Prepare a HDD or USB storage with at least 8 GB of free space.

b. Boot the board with BSP image either from bootable USB stick.

c. When the boot loader starts, select the install mode and press ENTER.

d. The installer starts immediately upon entering the console. Please follow
   on-screen instructions.

e. After the installation is finished, remove the boot device from the board
   and reboot it.

f. Use root account with empty password to login.
